Europe is a continent of contrasts and a variety and cultures and languages.
This diversity sadly led to countless conflicts, prejudices and wars that continue to this day.
Like a four-two states, many nations will go and say,
come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah.
The mountain represents pure worship elevated above all false religions.
Individuals out of all nations are harmoniously working together to support pure worship.
This was very evident during the World Headquarters visits to the Central Europe and Netherlands branches in May 2023
that my wife Judith and I were privileged to make in the company of Brother Pat LaFranca and his wife Alice.
Around 3,000 Bethel family members and remote volunteers in Central Europe come from over 35 nationalities.
While 15 nationalities are represented by around 470 Bethel family members and remote volunteers in the Netherlands.
The Central Europe branch oversees the preaching work in the countries of Austria, Germany, Lichtenstein, Luxembourg and Switzerland.
That is carried out by more than 215,000 publishers in about 50 languages.
They also print literature in about 200 languages and ship it to more than 80 countries.
The Netherlands branch oversees more than 30,000 publishers in about 350 congregations and 50 groups that cover 20 different languages in the Netherlands.
In cooperation with others, the Netherlands branch developed the JW Box, a tool that overcomes digital challenges and helps to spread the good news without being hindered by political borders.
We observed how these branches worked together to reach people of many nationalities with the good news.
The Central European branch supervises foreign language circuits that span territories in 26 European countries.
Brothers in the service department had this to say about the European project.
When Jehovah looks at the European continent, he does not see the political borders of Satan's system.
Jehovah sees his servants, their needs, their needs in the field and the potential.
In an effort to imitate Jehovah's view, the service committee gave approval for collaboration in the preaching work even when this work crossed national and branch borders.
As of May 2023, there are 148 European circuits within 30 language fields.
People need to hear the kingdom message in their mother tongue.
In recent years, congregations or groups enjoyed circuit visits for the first time in their language.
The service committee approved for special pioneers to be reassigned to European circuits in order to speed up the work.
Let's hear some comments from a couple that were reassigned from Romania to Germany.
We were asked if we were willing to serve in a country outside of Romania. We didn't expect it.
However, we were very happy because both Delia and I had the same thought.
When Jehovah calls, our answer must be yes.
I consider myself a little bit like a world citizen, a new world citizen.
Wherever I am on this earth, as long as there are brothers, as long as there are people, I can talk about Jehovah. It's perfect.
Before flowing into the North Sea, the river Rhine flows from the Swiss mountain through Germany into the branch territory of the Netherlands.
Just as water is not hindered by borders, neither is the preaching of the good news.
Along the many waterways in the Netherlands, experiences show that many rightly disposed ones are thirsting for the river of water of life.
Rotterdam has one of the largest ports in the world. On ships that harbor inland, sailors from many nations are responding to the good news as the following experience demonstrates.
Prior to the pandemic, I was preaching with my wife on the barges. We went to the wheelhouse and there sat a captain, originally from Hungary.
So he said, come in for the Bible I always make time. And he was overjoyed, expecting to go back as soon as possible we left there.
Unfortunately though, I didn't have his phone number. Forgot to ask.
Yeah, and then the pandemic came. That's when I turned it over to Jehovah. I said to Jehovah at the time, Jehovah, will you please help that boatman that he may get to know you?
When we were allowed to preach again, basically we went back as soon as possible. Via an app we learned that he was back in the butler port and he was very happy to see us.
Right away we started at less than one of the enjoy life forever book and after less than four he said, I don't know if I'm going to do this work forever.
What you have is very beautiful and I actually want to experience what you are experiencing. Jehovah uses angels for the preaching work and that was so obvious that Jehovah did the same now.
Divine education is provided throughout the branch territories. In addition to classes in Dutch, the Netherlands branch hosts multiple schools for Kingdom evangelizers for brothers and sisters from Germany in their school facilities in Swiftabad.
The English European Circuit hosted a Pioneer Service School in the Dutch City of Maastricht with an Italian instructor teaching students from Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands.
This education strengthens the work in the field. A newly formed European Circuit is for the heart of hearing and deaf ones.
The use of Zoom during the COVID-19 period stimulated the Dutch sign language field tremendously and several new Bible studies were started.
Of these, six are now unbaptized publishers and are progressing towards baptism. That is tremendous considering the size of the language group in the branch territory.
During the pandemic, approval was received to connect all Dutch sign language groups in the Netherlands together as one congregation via Zoom.
A Bible study attended the previous memorial. She mentioned that in fact she was very grateful for the corona period with Zoom as it allowed her to log on and she was able to first taste the meeting.
She went without a camera on. In six to twelve months that changed. She started turning on the camera. At the end of the Zoom period, she began to answer via Zoom.
And thus with the memorial, she was at the meeting and really enjoyed seeing everyone in real life for the first time.
Now we just have the situation in the Netherlands. Well, the thing is that there is only one congregation and two groups.
Sign languages are quite different in the various countries. Sign languages have something in common. That it is a language that is built on images.
Now to consider what could be done for the brothers so that they also receive a visit. And that the governing body then says, yes, okay, we know these are different languages. It's a different country.
But we don't think in borders. It's just all about it's one people and it is independent of any border.
Brothers and sisters who are coming as refugees to central Europe give proof of a world without borders as this touching interview shows.
The decision to move to another country was very difficult. Because when the band began in Russia, we understood that it would be dangerous for us, for our children.
We were always welcomed hospitably in the various congregations. We were invited to private homes right away, even if we were there for a couple of days.
I saw how Jehovah can use different people to different brothers, sisters, to help. And I realized that I can do that too. I want Jehovah to use me to help other brothers and sisters.
When we were told that we were going to have guests from Ukraine, we were so happy.
We started preparing a room for them, cleaning up everything, painting a lot of things, and making presents.
Well, if you remember all the way from Ukraine to here, the hand of Jehovah was constantly felt.
And when we arrived in Germany, and we were welcomed, and it was night, and in spite of that, they showed us such hospitality, such warmth, that, well, these are certainly unforgettable moments.
Both Angelina and the children, they surrounded us with care and attention. They invited us everywhere with them. It was so nice, cozy, warm. It just felt like home.
We now see what the Prophet Micah foretold being fulfilled. God's people are unitesedly going up to the mountain of Jehovah, the place of pure worship.
In a world where borders divide, the preaching and teaching work is reaching honest-hearted ones from all nations with instruction from Jehovah that transcends national borders.